Cloud Native - Chapter 5 - Updates to gRPC (#15935)
dotnet/docs: docs/architecture/cloud-native/rest-grpc.md

## Performance

gRPC uses HTTP/2 for its transport protocol. While compatible with HTTP 1.1, HTTP/2 features many advanced capabilities:

- A binary protocol for data transport - unlike HTTP 1.1, which sends data as clear text.
- Multiplexing support for sending multiple parallel requests over the same connection - HTTP 1.1 limits processing to one request/response message at a time.
- Bidirectional full-duplex communication for sending both client requests and server responses simultaneously.
- Built-in streaming enabling requests and responses to asynchronously stream large data sets.

gRPC is lightweight and highly performant. It can be up to 8x faster than JSON serialization with messages 60-80% smaller. In Microsoft [Windows Communication Foundation (WCF)](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/framework/wcf/whats-wcf) parlance, gRPC performance exceeds the speed and efficiency of the highly optimized [NetTCP bindings](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.servicemodel.nettcpbinding?view=netframework-4.8). Unlike NetTCP, which favors the Microsoft stack, gRPC is cross-platform.

## Protocol Buffers

> gRPC embraces an open-source technology called [Protocol Buffers](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/overview). They provide a highly efficient and platform-neutral serialization format for serializing structured messages that services send to each other. Using a cross-platform Interface Definition Language (IDL), developers define a service contract for each microservice. The contract, implemented as a text-based '.proto' file, describes the methods, inputs, and outputs for each service. The same contract file can be used for gRPC clients and services built on different development platforms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gRPC embraces an open-source technology called [Protocol Buffers](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/overview). They provide a highly efficient and platform-neutral serialization format for serializing structured messages that services send to each other. Using a cross-platform Interface Definition Language (IDL), developers define a service contract for each microservice. The contract, implemented as a text-based `.proto` file describes the methods, inputs, and outputs for each service. The same contract file can be used for gRPC clients and services built on different development platforms.
```

> Using the proto file," the Protobuf compiler, "Protoc," generates both client and service code for your target platform. The code includes the following components:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the proto file, the Protobuf compiler, `protoc`, generates both client and service code for your target platform. The code includes the following components:
```

- A strongly-typed DTO (Data Transfer Object) shared by the client and service.
- A strongly-typed base class with the required network plumbing that the remote gRPC service can inherit and extend.
- A client stub that contains the required plumbing to invoke the remote gRPC service.

At runtime, each message is serialized as a standard Protobuf representation and exchanged between the client and remote service. Unlike JSON or XML, Protobuf messages are serialized as compiled binary bytes.

The book, [gRPC for WCF Developers](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/architecture/grpc-for-wcf-developers/), available from the Microsoft Architecture Site, provides in-depth coverage of gRPC and Protocol Buffers.

## gRPC support in .NET

> Microsoft .NET Core 3.0 includes tooling and native support for gRPC. gRPC has been seamlessly integrated into the 3.0 framework with support for endpoint routing, built-in IoC, and logging. The open-source Kestrel web server supports HTTP/2 connections. Figure 4-20 shows a Visual Studio 2019 template that scaffolds a skeleton project for a gRPC service. Note how .NET Core fully supports the Windows, Linux, and macOS platforms.

Reviewer: Rephrase this entire para. The use of the word `framework` is confusing in the context of .NET Core. Use `.NET Core 3.0 SDK`
Also, 
- mention gRPC is supported in .NET Core 3.0 and **later**. 
- Visual Studio 2019 version 16.3 or later, with the ASP.NET and web development workload installed.
- support in dotnet CLI 

The sentence is confusing:

> Note how .NET Core fully supports the Windows, Linux, and macOS platforms.

Author: Refactored paragraph

![gRPC project in Visual Studio 2019](./media/grpc-project.png  )

**Figure 4-21**. gRPC project in Visual Studio 2019

In the previous figure, note the proto description file and service code. As you'll see shortly, Visual Studio generates additional configuration in both the Startup class and underlying project file.

An excellent introduction to building a gRPC service is [gRPC with ASP.NET Core 3.0](https://www.dotnetcurry.com/aspnet-core/1514/grpc-asp-net-core-3) from the .NET Curry magazine series.

## gRPC usage

Favor gRPC for the following scenarios:

- Synchronous backend microservice-to-microservice communication where an immediate response is required to continue processing.
- Polyglot environments that need to support mixed programming platforms.
- Low latency and high throughput communication where performance is critical.
- Point-to-point real-time communication - gRPC can push messages in real time without polling and has excellent support for bi-directional streaming.
- Network constrained environments – binary gRPC messages are always smaller than an equivalent text-based JSON message.

> At the time of this writing, gRPC is primarily used in backend services. Most modern browsers can't provide the level of HTTP/2 control required to support a front-end gRPC client.

Reviewer: You can also mention about the experimental support for gRPC-Web: https://devblogs.microsoft.com/aspnet/grpc-web-experiment/

Author: Added!

## gRPC implementation

The microservice reference architecture for [eShop on Containers](https://github.com/dotnet-architecture/eShopOnContainers) demonstrates how to implement gRPC into microservices on the .NET Core platform. Figure 4-22 shows the implementation.

> ![gRPC in eShop on Containers](./media/grpc-implementation.png)

Reviewer: Use a better diagram here. The important aspect here is to show how aggregators use gRPC.

Reviewer: You can briefly mention the service mesh implementation too. Those are practical scenarios.

Reviewer: Check this : https://github.com/dotnet-architecture/eShopOnContainers/wiki/API-gateways

Author: Refactored.

**Figure 4-22**. gRPC in eShop on Containers

In the previous figure, note how eShop exposes multiple API gateways (on the left) embracing the [Backend for Frontends pattern](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/architecture/patterns/backends-for-frontends). The *Web-Marketing gateway* (on the bottom) implements RESTful HTTP services for simple CRUD operations. It also includes an Aggregator microservice that implements a gRPC client. The gRPC client makes synchronous gRPC-based calls (in red) to backend gRPC services for more complex operations. Keep in mind that gRPC communication requires both client and server components.

> ### gRPC client implementation

Reviewer: IMHO, Client and server implementation details are unnecessary here. The Get-Started guides that you have linked will cover those. The book should be focusing on gRPC scenarios only.

Author: Removed anb refactored.

            _logger.LogDebug("grpc response {@response}", response);
                return MapToBasketData(response);
            });
        }
    }
    ...
}

public static class GrpcCallerService
{
    public static async Task<TResponse> CallService<TResponse>(string urlGrpc, Func<GrpcChannel, Task<TResponse>> func)
    {
        var channel = GrpcChannel.ForAddress(urlGrpc);

        Log.Information("Creating grpc client base address urlGrpc ={@urlGrpc}, BaseAddress={@BaseAddress} ", urlGrpc, channel.Target);

        try
        {
            return await func(channel);
        }
        catch (RpcException e)
        {
            Log.Error("Error calling via grpc: {Status} - {Message}", e.Status, e.Message);
            return default;
        }
    }
    ...
}
```

**Figure 4-26** Custom gRPC client code

Note in the previous figure how *GetById* method in the *BasketService* class creates an anonymous method. The method is passed into the generic *CallService* method in the *GrpcCallerService*. Importantly, you can see how *CallService* consumes the system-generated *Basket.BasketClient* and *gRPChannel* gRPC plumbing code to invoke remote calls.

> ### gRPC server implementation

Reviewer: As mentioned earlier, Server & Client implementation details can be avoided in this book.

Author: Removed and refactored.

Author: Removed

```csharp
    private static IWebHost BuildWebHost(IConfiguration configuration, string[] args) =>
        WebHost.CreateDefaultBuilder(args)
            .CaptureStartupErrors(false)
            .ConfigureKestrel(options =>
            {
                var ports = GetDefinedPorts(configuration);
                // Endpoint for RESTful calls
                options.Listen(IPAddress.Any, ports.httpPort, listenOptions =>
                {
                    listenOptions.Protocols = HttpProtocols.Http1AndHttp2;
                });

                // Endpoint for gRPC calls
                options.Listen(IPAddress.Any, ports.grpcPort, listenOptions =>
                {
                    listenOptions.Protocols = HttpProtocols.Http2;
                });
            })
```

Note in the previous figure how two endpoints are opened. One listens for HTTP traffic for the RESTful endpoints and the other for gRPC calls. Importantly, the gRPC endpoint specifies the HTTP/2 protocol which is required for gRPC communication.

## Looking ahead

> Looking ahead, gRPC could well play a major role in dethroning the dominance of REST for cloud-native systems. The performance benefits and ease of development are compelling. However, REST will still most likely be around for a long time. It excels for publicly exposed APIs and for backward compatibility reasons.

Reviewer: The use of a word like dethroning is unnecessary. We should be subtle in our prediction statements :)

Author: Remove "dethroning" and softened prediction.
